# MODERATE Platform API

This repository contains the HTTP API of the MODERATE platform, serving as the public entry point for developers to interact programmatically with the data assets and services provided by MODERATE.

The API is based on the following main building blocks:

* [FastAPI](https://github.com/tiangolo/fastapi) as the HTTP API framework.
* [SQLModel](https://github.com/tiangolo/sqlmodel) to define the data models and interact with the database.
* [Casbin](https://github.com/casbin/casbin) to implement the authorization layer.

**Authentication** is handled by the central MODERATE identity provider (Keycloak). The API is prepared to sit behind MODERATE's API gateway (APISIX) which communicates with Keycloak to issue access tokens and then include them in the `Authorization` header of the requests forwarded to the API. The API then validates the token and extracts the user's identity from it.

**Authorization** is based on the list of roles assigned to the user in Keycloak, which are then mapped to permissions in the API using Casbin.

**Documentation** of the API is based on the OpenAPI specification and is automatically generated by FastAPI.

## Development

You can deploy a local development instance of the API that includes APISIX and Keycloak in an effort to faithfully reproduce the production environment. There are two options when it comes to the object storage service, the first one is using the built-in local MinIO instance, and the second one is using the S3-compatible interface of a GCS bucket .

To use **MinIO**:

```console
task dev-up
```

To use **GCS** (or any other S3-compatible service):

```console
ACCESS_KEY="TheAccessKey" SECRET_KEY="TheSecretKey" task dev-up-gcs
```

> Other S3-related environment variables such as the region and endpoint can be found in the Taskfile. The default configuration points to the S3-compatible interface of GCS.

### Create an admin user

You need to create an admin user in Keycloak to be able to log in to the API. Moreover, this user needs to be assigned a specific role. Check the Compose file and `.env.dev.default` for the URLs and default credentials.

The role name is defined in the `moderate_api/config.py` file. Please note that this role is a _client-level_ role, and not a _realm-level_ role—the role should be created in the `apisix` client.

### Trust Services

The [MODERATE Trust Services](https://github.com/MODERATE-Project/trust-service) are an _optional_ dependency of the platform API. When this dependency is available, the API can use it to check the integrity of datasets via cryptographic proofs stored in the IOTA DLT.

To deploy a development instance of the Trust Services along with the API you need to create a `.env.trust.local` file that defines the `L2_PRIVATE_KEY` environment variable. Please check the Trust Services repository for further information.
